Add tutorials to documentation (#537)
Qiskit/retworkx: docs/source/tutorial/introduction.rst

########################
Introduction to retworkx
########################

This guide serves as an introduction to working with retworkx. If you're a
current or past `NetworkX <https:://networkx.org>`__ user who is looking at
using retworkx as a replacement for NetworkX, you can also refer to
:ref:`networkx` for a detailed guide comparing using retworkx with NetworkX.

Creating a Graph
================

To create an empty undirected graph :math:`G` with no nodes and no edges you
can run the following code:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import retworkx as rx
    G = rx.PyGraph()

A :class:`~retworkx.PyGraph` is an undirected collection of nodes (vertices)

> along with pairs of nodes (called edges, links, etc). Nodes and edges in

Reviewer: The use of "undirected" feels awkward to me. Perhaps just say "unordered pairs"? Just a suggestion.

Author: Updated in: https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx/pull/537/commits/f7e4421111f967d25a0b2303bb34e5e110fdd8cc

retworkx are assigned any Python object (e.g. a numeric value, a string, an
image, an xml object, another graph, a custom node object, etc) for a data
payload (also referred to as a weight in the API and documentation). Nodes

> and edges are uniquely identified an integer ``index`` which is stable for

Reviewer: typo: identified by

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx/pull/537/commits/f7e4421111f967d25a0b2303bb34e5e110fdd8cc

    class GraphNode:
        def __init__(self, value):
            self.index = None
            self.value = value

        def __str__(self):
            return f"GraphNode: {self.value} @ index: {self.index}"

    class GraphEdge:
        def __init__(self, value):
            self.index = None
            self.value = value

        def __str__(self):
            return f"EdgeNode: {self.value} @ index: {self.index}"

    graph = rx.PyGraph()
    graph.add_nodes_from([GraphNode(i) for i in range(5)])
    graph.add_edges_from([(i, i + 1, GraphEdge(i)) for i in range(4)])
    # Populate index attribute in GraphNode objects
    for index in graph.node_indices():
        graph[index].index = index
    # Populate index attribute in GraphEdge objects
    for index, data in graph.edge_index_map().items():
        data[2].index = index
    print("Nodes:")
    for node in graph.nodes():
        print(node)
    print("Edges:")
    for edge in graph.edges():
        print(edge)

Accessing edges and neighbors
=============================

You can access edges from a node using the :meth:`~rx.PyGraph.incident_edges`
method:

.. jupyter-execute::

    print(G.incident_edges(2))

> which will return the edge indices of the edges incident a given node. You

Reviewer: "incident to node 2"

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx/pull/537/commits/f7e4421111f967d25a0b2303bb34e5e110fdd8cc

method:

.. jupyter-execute::

    print(G.neighbors(2))

which returns the node indices of any neighbors of node ``2``.

Directed Graphs
===============

A directed graph is a graph that is made up of a set of nodes connected by
directed edges (often called arcs). Edges have a directionality which is
different from undirected graphs where edges have no notion of a direction to
them. In retworkx the :class:`~retworkx.PyDiGraph` class is used to create
directed graphs. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import retworkx as rx
    from retworkx.visualization import mpl_draw

    path_graph = rx.generators.directed_path_graph(5)
    mpl_draw(path_graph)

> In this example we created a 5 node directed path graph. This shows the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example we created a directed path graph with 5 nodes. This shows the
```

In this example we created a 5 node directed path graph. This shows the
directionality of the edges in the graph visualization with the arrow head
pointing to the target node.

> Multigraphs

Reviewer: There are some functions which do not work correctly on multigraphs, yet give no warning when a multigraph is passed to them. What is the long-term plan about this?

Will all functions eventually verify their input? Or will this be the responsibility of the user (for performance reasons)?  Either way, it would be useful to mention which choice you are going with.

Author: We should be documenting it in all the docstrings for those functions where it's not supported (for example https://qiskit.org/documentation/retworkx/stubs/retworkx.transitivity.html). If a note like that this is missing from a function that doesn't support a multigraphs that's a doc bug we should fix.

I think either approach is valid and we can handle this on a case by case basis as in some cases the performance overhead of validating an input graph has no parallel edges might be too high. But I agree we should be documenting it explicitly everywhere.

Reviewer: In igraph, we are planning to start caching whether the graph has multiple edges, as well as a few other simple properties that are necessary for validating inputs. This is not implemented yet though, and will require some major changes.

any method call made that would add a parallel edge will instead update the
existing edge’s weight/data payload. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    graph = rx.PyGraph(multigraph=False)
    graph.add_nodes_from(range(3))
    graph.add_edges_from([(0, 1, 'A'), (0, 1, 'B'), (1, 2, 'C')])
    mpl_draw(graph, with_labels=True, edge_labels=str)

In this example, our attempt to add a parallel edge between nodes ``0``
and ``1`` will instead result in the existing edge's data payload being updated from
``'A'`` to ``'B'``.

Graph Generators and operations
===============================

In addition to constructing graphs one node and edge at a time, you can also
create graphs using the :ref:`generator_funcs`, :ref:`random_generators`,
and :ref:`graph-ops` to quickly generate graphs and/or apply different
operations on the graph. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    lolipop_graph = rx.generators.lollipop_graph(4, 3)
    mesh_graph = rx.generators.mesh_graph(4)
    combined_graph = rx.cartesian_product(lolipop_graph, mesh_graph)[0]
    mpl_draw(combined_graph)

Additionally there are alternate constructors such as

> :meth:`~retworkx.read_edge_list` or :meth:`~retworkx.from_adjacency_matrix`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.read_edge_list` or :meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.from_adjacency_matrix`
```

for building graphs from files or other inputs. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import tempfile

    with tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile('wt') as fd:
        path = fd.name
        fd.write('0 1\n')
        fd.write('0 2\n')
        fd.write('0 3\n')
        fd.write('1 2\n')
        fd.write('2 3\n')
        fd.flush()
        graph = rx.PyGraph.read_edge_list(path)
    mpl_draw(graph)

Analyzing graphs
================

The structure of a graph :math:`G` can be analyzed using the available graph algorithm
functions. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    G = rx.PyGraph()
    G.extend_from_edge_list([(0, 1), (0, 2)])
    new_node = G.add_node("spam")
    print(rx.connected_components(G))

>     degrees = []
>     for node in G.node_indices():
>         degrees.append(G.degree(node))

Reviewer 2: It's probably better to store the degrees in a dict in case graph has holes in the node indices.

```suggestion
    degrees = {}
    for node in G.node_indices():
        degrees[node] = G.degree(node)
```

>         degrees.append(G.degree(node))

Reviewer: What is the complexity of `G.degree()`? Constant time or linear in the degree itself (because of the need to traverse the linked list representing incident edges)?

Author: It is linear as to the number of edges on the node as it iterates over the edges list and return the count: https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx/blob/main/src/graph.rs#L945-L955

In local testing I think the rust compiler can do a fair number of optimizations through the use of iterators and it's quite quick:

![degree_scaling](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2447371/147298061-cdaa68a4-9cb8-457a-bbc6-f891f682ad5e.png)

scaling up to 10^8 incident edge it only takes ~0.24 sec.

Generated with:
```python
import time

import retworkx as rx
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

sizes = np.logspace(0, 8, dtype=int)
print(sizes)
times = []
for size in sizes:
    g = rx.PyGraph()
    n = g.add_node(None)
    edge_list = [(n, i) for i in range(1, size + 1)]
    g.extend_from_edge_list(edge_list)
    start = time.time()
    deg = g.degree(n)
    stop = time.time()
    times.append(stop - start)
    print(deg)
print(times)
plt.plot(sizes, times)
plt.title("PyGraph.degree(node) runtime scaling")
plt.ylabel("Runtime (sec.)")
plt.xlabel("Number of incident edges (log scale)")
plt.savefig("/tmp/degree_scaling.png", dpi=900)
```

Reviewer: I was just curious, and I was wondering if this is a weakness of the data structure you are using. I can't think of many applications where this would become a bottleneck though, and even if it would, it would be easy to just store the degrees within the graph data structure, for immediate access.

########################
Introduction to retworkx
########################

This guide serves as an introduction to working with retworkx. If you're a
current or past `NetworkX <https:://networkx.org>`__ user who is looking at
using retworkx as a replacement for NetworkX, you can also refer to
:ref:`networkx` for a detailed comparison.

Creating a Graph
================

To create an empty undirected graph :math:`G` with no nodes and no edges you
can run the following code:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import retworkx as rx
    G = rx.PyGraph()

A :class:`~retworkx.PyGraph` is comprised of nodes (vertices)
and unordered pairings of nodes (called edges, links, etc). Both nodes and
edges in retworkx have an assigned data payload (also referred to as a weight
in the API and documentation) which can be any Python object (e.g. a numeric
value, a string, an image, an XML object, another graph, a custom node object,
etc.). Nodes and edges are uniquely identified by an integer ``index``
which is stable for the lifetime of that node or edge in the graph. These
indices are not guaranteed to be contiguous as removed nodes or

> edges will leave holes in the sequence of assigned indices, and an index
> can be reused after a removal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
edges will leave holes in the sequence of assigned indices, as other indices
are not affected by removals.
```
I think "index can be reused after a removal" gives the sense that if you remove index 1, we might assign 1 to another node later. So I tried rephrasing it

Author: Actually, that's exactly my intent here. If you do:

```
import retworkx
graph = retworkx.add_nodes_from(range(3))
graph.remove_node(1)
graph.add_node("NEWNODE")
graph[1] == "NEWNODE"
```

petgraph is keeping a freed node and edge list internally to avoid reallocating the internal vecs when there are holes.

Reviewer 3: I forgot about that petgraph internal, well let's leave it as is

    print(G.edge_index_map())

Additionally, you can access the list of node and edge data payloads directly
with :meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.nodes` and :meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.edges`

.. jupyter-execute::

    print("Node data payloads")
    print(G.nodes())
    print("Edge data payloads")
    print(G.edges())

.. _tutorial_removal:

Removing elements from a graph
===============================

You can remove a node or edge from a graph in a similar manner to adding
elements to the graph. There are methods :meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.remove_node`,
:meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.remove_nodes_from`,
:meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.remove_edge`, :meth:`~remove_edge_from_index`, and
:meth:`~retworkx.PyGraph.remove_edges_from` to remove nodes and edges from
the graph. One thing to note is that on removal there can be holes in the
list of indices for nodes and/or edges in the graph. For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import retworkx

    graph = retworkx.PyGraph()
    graph.add_nodes_from(list(range(5)))
    graph.add_nodes_from(list(range(2)))
    graph.remove_node(2)
    print(graph.node_indices())

You can see here that the indices for the nodes in ``graph`` are missing ``2``.

> Also, after a removal the index of the removed node or edge will be reused on

Author: It's defined behavior for the operation of the petgraph `StableGraph` class we use inside of `PyGraph` and `PyDiGraph`. When nodes are removed the indices are put on a freed list which if not empty is used for the next index (so as to not cause a potential reallocation): https://github.com/petgraph/petgraph/blob/master/src/graph_impl/stable_graph/mod.rs#L251-L259 I believe we've documented this in the class documentation already.

    print(rx.connected_components(G))
    degrees = {}
    for node in G.node_indices():
        degrees[node] = G.degree(node)
    print(degrees)

.. jupyter-execute::

    G.remove_node(new_node)
    G.extend_from_edge_list([(0, 3), (0, 4), (1, 2)])
    rx.transitivity(G)

See the :ref:`algorithm_api` API documentation section for a list of the available
functions and corresponding usage information.

Drawing graphs
==============

There are two visualization functions provided in retworkx for visualizing
graphs. The first is :func:`~retworkx.visualization.mpl_draw`, which uses the
`matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`__ library to render the
visualization of the graph. The :func:`~retworkx.visualization.mpl_draw`
function relies on the :ref:`layout-functions` provided with retworkx to
generate a layout (the coordinates to draw the nodes of the graph) for the
graph (by default :func:`~retworkx.spring_layout` is used). For example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    G = rx.generators.generalized_petersen_graph(5, 2)
    subax1 = plt.subplot(121)
    mpl_draw(G, with_labels=True, ax=subax1)
    subax2 = plt.subplot(122)

>     layout = rx.shell_layout(G, nlist=[range(5, 10), range(5)])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    layout = rx.shell_layout(G, nlist=[[0, 1, 2, 3, 4], [6, 7, 8, 9, 5]])
```
The Petersen graph looks better with this layout

    mpl_draw(G, pos=layout, with_labels=True, ax=subax2)

The second function is :func:`~retworkx.visualization.graphviz_draw` which
uses `Graphviz <https://graphviz.org/>`__ to generate visualizations. For
example:

.. jupyter-execute::

    from retworkx.visualization import graphviz_draw

    G = rx.generators.heavy_hex_graph(7)
    # set data payload to index
    for node in G.node_indices():
        G[node] = node

    def node_attr_fn(node):
        attr_dict = {
            "style": "filled",
            "shape": "circle",
            "label": str(node)
        }
        # Data nodes are yellow
        if node < 7 * 7:
            attr_dict["color"] = "yellow"
            attr_dict["fill_color"] = "yellow"
        # Syndrome nodes are black
        elif node >= 7 * 7 and node < (7 * 7) + ((7 - 1) * (7 + 1) / 2):
            attr_dict["color"] = "black"
            attr_dict["fill_color"] = "black"
            attr_dict["fontcolor"] = "white"
        # Flag quits are blue
        else:
            attr_dict["color"] = "blue"
            attr_dict["fill_color"] = "blue"
        return attr_dict

    graphviz_draw(G, node_attr_fn=node_attr_fn, method="neato")

> Generally when deciding which visualization function to use there are a few
> considerations to make. :func:`~retworkx.visualization.mpl_draw` is a better
> choice for smaller graphs or cases where you want to integrate your graph
> drawing as part of a larger visualization.
> :func:`~retworkx.visualization.graphviz_draw` is typically a better choice
> for larger graphs because Graphviz is a dedicated tool for drawing graphs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Generally, when deciding which visualization function to use, there are a few
considerations to make. :func:`~retworkx.visualization.mpl_draw` is a better
choice for smaller graphs or cases where you want to integrate your graph
drawing as part of a larger visualization.
:func:`~retworkx.visualization.graphviz_draw` is typically a better choice
for larger graphs, because Graphviz is a dedicated tool for drawing graphs.
```
